ripl(1) -- Ruby Interactive Print Loop - A light, modular alternative to irb
====================================

## SYNOPSIS

    ripl [COMMAND] [ARGS] [-r|--require] [-I] [-f] [-d] [-h|--help] [-v|--version]

## DESCRIPTION

ripl is a light, modular alternative to irb. Like irb, it loads ~/.irbrc, has autocompletion and
keeps history in ~/.irb_history.  Unlike irb, it is highly customizable via plugins and supports
commands.  This customizability makes it easy to build custom shells (i.e. for a gem or application)
and complex shells (i.e. for the web).

## COMING FROM IRB

When first trying ripl, you may experience errors in your ~/.irbrc due to an irb-specific
configuration. In order to have ripl and irb coexist peacefully, you should silence these errors.
To silence them without touching your ~/.irbrc, install the ripl-irb gem. This ripl plugin fakes
irb's existence and points to ripl equivalents for your irb configurations. Otherwise, if you don't mind
modifying ~/.irbrc, wrap your irb-specific configuration in a block as follow:

    if defined? IRB
      IRB.conf[:BLAH] = 'blah'
      # ...
    end

## CONFIGURATION

All ripl shells load the ruby file ~/.riplrc if it exists. In this file, plugins are required and
configuration options are set. To configure ripl and its plugins, use Ripl.config. By default,
Ripl.config is a hash with the following keys:

* `:binding`:
  Binding to use for eval(). Default is TOPLEVEL_BINDING.

* `:completion`:
  A hash that configures completion via Bond.start. See bond for more details.

* `:history`:
  A file used to store input history. Default is '~/.irb_history'.

* `:irbrc`:
  A ruby file to load at startup or false to not load anything. Default is '~/.irbrc'.

* `:name`:
  Name of the shell. Default is 'ripl'.

* `:prompt`:
  A string or lambda to generate string that prompts user for input. Default is '>> '.

* `:readline`:
  A boolean or string to enable Readline. Default is true. If a string, requires the readline-like library.

* `:result_prompt`:
  A string that prefixes the result of an eval. Default is '=> '.

Plugins can optionally provide their own config key(s) for use here. It is strongly recommended that
a plugin start with an underscored version of its name i.e. Ripl::ColorError -> Ripl.config[:color_error].

An example ~/.riplrc:

      require 'ripl/multi_line'
      require 'ripl/color_error'
      Ripl.config[:color_error] = :blue

## PLUGINS

A ripl plugin is a module that is included into Ripl::Shell or extended into Ripl::Runner.  Being
simply modules, they can be packaged as gems and reused across shells as needed.  ripl highly
encourages plugins by loading them as early as possible and allowing them to extend most of ripl's
functionality. As mentioned in the `CONFIGURATION` section, a plugin can be configured via
Ripl.config.

To always use a plugin, require it in ~/.riplrc. To sometimes use it, require it from
the commandline:

    $ ripl -rripl/multi_line

Plugins can also be required in the console but it is not recommended since plugins can depend on
initialization that occurs before the console is started. For this same reason, plugins should not
be required in ~/.irbrc.

## CREATE PLUGINS

For an example shell plugin, let's color error messages red:

    require 'ripl'

    # To try place in ~/.riplrc
    module Ripl
      module RedError
        def format_error(error)
          "\e[31m#{super}\e[m"
        end
      end
    end
    Ripl::Shell.include Ripl::RedError

Note this plugin extends format_error() by invoking the original format_error() with super. To see
what methods are available for extension, see Ripl::Shell::API and Ripl::Runner::API.

Points to consider when creating plugins:

* When adding functionality to a method, make sure to call `super` to preserve existing functionality.

* When replacing functionality for a method, make sure the method's expectations are met i.e.
  setting a specific instance variable or calling certain methods. Failure to do so can `break` ripl
  for you and anyone else who uses your plugin!

* Plugins can setup and teardown anything around a shell by extending Shell#before_loop and Shell#after_loop:

    module Ripl::MyPlugin
      # When requiring a plugin within ripl, this callback isn't called
      def before_loop
        super
        # Open file, open connection ...
      end

      def after_loop
        super
        # Write to file, close a connection ...
      end
    end

* To add configuration for a plugin, add a key to Ripl.config that matches the underscored version
  of the plugin name i.e. Ripl::RedError -> Ripl.config[:red_error]. To set a default config value, just set it
  after including the plugin into Ripl::Shell.

* To add console commands for a plugin, make them methods in a module and include the module into Ripl::Commands.  For example:

    module Ripl::SuperHistory
      # plugin hooks into history
      # then defines command
      module Commands
        def history
          # ...
        end
      end
    end

    Ripl::Commands.include Ripl::SuperHistory::Commands

    \>\> history # use command in ripl

* To define custom autocompletion for a plugin and its commands, create a completion file in
  lib/ripl/completions/plugin_name i.e. ripl-super_history plugin -> lib/ripl/completions/super_history.rb.
  The syntax of this file is explained [in bond's docs](http://tagaholic.me/bond/doc/Bond/Rc.html).
  To autocomplete a console command, define a :method completion. For an example plugin that uses this, see
  [ripl-commands](http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl-commands).

* For plugins with console commands, commands aren't immediately recognized if the plugin is required within ripl.
  To fix this: Ripl.shell.add_commands(self).

* A plugin should not have Ripl.shell in the top-level i.e. touch Ripl.shell when it's required. Doing
  this can make commandline options buggy.

* For more examples of plugins, see gems I've made that start with 'ripl-'.

## CREATE CUSTOM SHELLS

Creating and starting a custom shell is as simple as:

    require 'ripl'
    # Define plugins, load files, etc...
    Ripl.start

Ripl.start takes the same config keys mentioned in the `CONFIGURATION` section. For example if you wanted to
start on a specific binding:

    Ripl.start :binding => MyClass.instance_eval{ binding }

Also, since all shells load ~/.riplrc, Ripl.start can be used to override undesirable global
configuration for a custom shell.

## COMMANDS

A ripl command is a command passed to ripl that loads a custom shell. It's a convenient way to
package and invoke custom shells. A ripl command can take standard ripl options as long as they are
before the command:

    # Load rails console without ~/.irbrc
    $ ripl rails -f

    # Load rails console with debugger
    $ ripl rails -rrdebug

To create a ripl command, create an executable in the format ripl-command and make sure it's in your
shell's $PATH. For example, the file 'ripl-my_gem' would be invoked with 'ripl my_gem'. A ripl
command can take arguments, local options and global options (i.e. -f). To avoid conflicts between
local and global options, local options *must be parsed and deleted* by the command before
Ripl.start is invoked.  For example commands, see
[ripl-rails](http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl-rails) and
[ripl-play](http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl-play).

## BUGS

Please report bugs at <http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl/issues>.

## COPYRIGHT

`ripl` is Copyright (C) 2010 Gabriel Horner

## SEE ALSO

<http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl>, <http://github.com/cldwalker/bond>, <http://github.com/cldwalker/nirvana>,
<http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl-irb>, <http://github.com/cldwalker/ripl-rails>, <http://github.com/janlelis/multi_line>
